hello mass funds the winning question
I'm answering this week is what is the
graph of x to the power x now I was
actually asked this question at my
Oxford University interview so you know
it's a good one when attempting to solve
a problem in maths a good starting point
is to consider slightly simpler or
easier cases than the one you actually
want to solve for the idea being that we
can use our knowledge of the easier ones
to be able to help us to understand the
more difficult ones here we're trying to
plot the graph of y equals x to the
power x so let's start off really simple
and just think about well what does the
graph of y equals x look like so y
equals x this just says that the Y value
is the same as the x value so we must
pass through 0 0 we must pass through 1
1 when X is 2 y has to be the same which
is to saying 4 3 & 3 same for 4 & 4 and
so the graph is just gonna join up all
of these points so we get this lovely
straight line almost straight line
lovely straight line passing through all
of these points and that is y equals x
the simplest case now let's make it a
little trickier and consider y equals x
squared so as before we can just plot a
few points and sort of join them up to
get our graph and you can see that
you've actually got a lovely parabola
shape which is going to increase off and
above the board like this we can carry
on like this and maybe consider X cubed
next and in this instance it's going to
be even steeper than the square ball and
then what happens if we consider say y
equals x to the fourth so following the
pattern we don't expect an even steeper
curve maybe for X to the fifth and even
steeper curve again so even though we've
not yet reached our X to the power X
we're starting to gain an understanding
of how different graphs look for
different powers of X so far we've only
looked at whole number powers of X and
that's precisely because they are these
simple
cases so now let's step it up a little
bit and let's consider fractional powers
in particular let's look at fractional
powers between naught and 1 starting
with say y equals x to the 1/2 so here
we have y equals x drawn in red and y
equals x squared here in green and we
want to now draw y equals x to the hub
so we have an equation if we square both
sides of this equation we get y squared
equals x and you can see that these two
are very similar equations they just had
that x and y switched around so if the
graph of y equals x squared has this
shape then what do you think the graph
of x equals y squared or y equals x to
the half will look like well it's going
to be the same thing but with x and y
switched so using the y equals x line
and graph as a guide we expect that y
equals x to the half will just be
reflected in that line
so excuse me bad drawing it's quite hard
to do this on white bone but y equals x
to the 1/2 is just going to be the
reflection of y equals x squared in the
line y equals x for the reasons that we
just show so this is y equals x to the
ha now if we want to consider other
fractional powers say y equals x to the
1/3 or y equals x to the 1/4 then we can
use the same trick we just take the
graphs of y equals x cubed or y equals x
to the fourth and just reflect them in y
equals x so you can see that you're just
reflecting the whole number power in the
line y equals x to get the fractional
power and this is an example of how
using the earlier simpler cases can
really help you to draw the more
difficult ones now that we are a bit
more comfortable with drawing graphs in
general let's consider the big one let's
consider X to the power X so we want to
draw y equals x to the power X for
different values of X so let's start off
by actually considering specific points
on the graph and let's make it nice and
easy and let's consider say x equals 1 2
& 3 so when X is 1 Y is 1 to the power
of 1 which is just 1 when X is 2 y is X
to the power x which is 2 to the power 2
which is 2 squared 2 times 2 is 4 when X
is 3 y will be 3 to the power 3 which is
3 cubed which is 3 times 3 times 3 which
is 27 so already we can start to see
here that this function this graph is
going to increase very quickly beyond 1
so if we consider this to be the point 1
and then this to also be the point 1
then from here onwards we're just very
quickly increasing towards very large
values of Y as X only slightly in
Croesus this is very similar to be
graphs of y equals x cubed y equals x to
the fourth as the power of X is
increasing the graph shoots up faster
and faster towards like off the page
towards infinity now we know what
happens with the graph for X greater
than one we can start to think about the
difficult bit what is happening between
0 & 1 and I've left this till the end
because this is the hardest part and
this is why we were drawing the graphs
of X to the power 1/2 and X to the power
1/3 earlier because understanding the
shape of those graphs and what's
happening between north and 1 is very
helpful when it comes to trying to plot
this graph X to the power X so let's
consider the point x equals 1/2 so for X
being 1/2 y is about 0.7 what so sort of
here okay
that's good we've got somewhere we have
a point between or to 1 now let's
consider a second point
let's try one third for example so we
move down from a half to a third and
this moves down a little bit to naught
point six nine and we have this one here
and then we move down a little bit okay
again good we have a second point on our
graph now so let's consider a third
point what about 1/4 and this is a very
very interesting point because we've
decreased X even further down to 1/4 but
our Y value has actually increased a
little bit again what we've actually
found here is the turning point of our
graph so we have a decreasing section
and then it begins to increase we can
calculate the exact value at which this
change occurs at but for our purposes we
don't need to we don't need to be that
accurate we just want an idea of the
general shape of the graph and we know
here that it has to have this turning
point this u-shape Bend in its plot and
we can calculate other points so we
for example consider 2/3 3/4 and do a
similar kind of calculation to as we
have over here and we would start to see
that we would get values and it would
join up and we get this lovely sort of
tick shape almost like the night tick
and then the question is what's actually
happening as X gets smaller and smaller
so what's happening between 1/4 and 0
doing some calculations for numbers less
than 1/4 we see that the value of x to
the power x actually begins to increase
so at x equals 1/4 we are at nor point 7
1 about 4y and as X gets smaller and
smaller we start to see these points
increasing and the big question is what
is 0 to the power 0 what is this
increasing towards to answer that
question we're going to consider a
simpler example and again use that
knowledge and understanding to help us
with the trickier case of 0 to the power
0 so let's consider the number 2 and to
take 2 to the power 0 you actually have
to take a limit but don't worry we don't
need to go into that level of detail
it's just a case of spotting the pattern
what is happening as you take smaller
and smaller powers of 2 is that the
answer is tending towards a limit and to
be able to see what that limit is you
would need to continue this pattern and
you can try this on your calculator do 2
to the power of 1 divided by a thousand
or 1 divided by a million and take 2 to
that power and you'll see you get closer
and closer to 1 and in the very limiting
case of 2 to the power 0 you do indeed
reach that limit and you do indeed get
the final outcome of the pattern this
number what this is all well and good
knowing this for number 2 but we can use
this for any number so you could put in
number 3 here and follow the same
procedure and 3 to the 0 would be what
you could go even smaller maybe you
could take a half to the power 0 again
you would get what you could even take a
quarter to the power zero you would get
one maybe even one divided by a million
to the power zero you get what and if
you go back to our graph and think about
where would 1 divided by 1 million where
would the x value lie it would basically
be on the axis and the answer would be 1
so you can see that these points here
would start to increase and the closer
and closer you get to X being 0 the
closer and closer your Y value gets to 1
and that is the final answer that is the
final part of our graph 0 to the power 0
is equal to 1 so there you have it the
full graph of y equals x to the power X
drawn step by step and then patch
together to get this lovely tick shape
this is of course only for positive
values of X it can't be extended to
negative values of X but things get very
tricky and we have to go into complex
numbers so I am gonna leave it there
thanks everybody for watching I hope
you've enjoyed the video and most
importantly I hope that I've answered
the question and you now know how to
draw the graph of x to the power x
please do keep sending me your questions
I love receiving them and to keep voting
you can check out everything I make on
Tom rocks mass comm you can follow me on
facebook twitter instagram at tom rocks
maths you can also subscribe to my
channel that will be great and i will
see you soon with the answer to another
one of your questions